To determine whether red blood cell (RBC) product age influences the occurrence of acute transfusion-related complications and mortality in dogs. The hypothesis was that acute transfusion-related complications and mortality would increase with age of product.Retrospective study (2010-2012).University teaching hospital.Two hundred and ten clinical canine patients.None.Medical records were reviewed for dogs receiving RBC-containing products. Patient signalment; reason for transfusion; product type, dose, age, and source; pretransfusion compatibility; rate, route, and method of administration; administration of multiple transfusions; underlying disease; occurrence of transfusion-related complications (eg, fever, hemolysis, gastrointestinal distress, cardiovascular, neurologic, and respiratory complications); various hematologic parameters; and survival were recorded. Data were analyzed for association between potential risk factors and occurrence of transfusion-related complications as well as between transfusion-related complications and survival. Of 333 transfusion events in 210 patients, 84 transfusion-related complications occurred. Fever was most common (41/333), followed by hemolysis (21/333). For every additional day of product age, the odds of hemolysis increased significantly (odds ratio, 1.11; 95% confidence interval, 1.06-1.16; P < 0.0001). Transfusion-related complications when considered as a whole were associated with higher dose of product, longer duration of administration per transfusion event, and immune-mediated disease, but not with source of product or general category of anemia. Administration rate was significantly slower in patients with febrile transfusion-related complications (P < 0.0001). Product age was not associated with increased mortality.Age of stored RBC products is associated with increased risk of transfusion-related hemolysis, but not with fever. Prospective clinical studies evaluating the influence of storage duration on development of in vitro versus in vivo hemolysis are warranted.
