Though carbon monoxide (CO) poisonings account currently for a relatively small percentage of total non-natural deaths in Europe, they represent a serious public health burden and significant component of avoidable mortality in many countries. Our aim was to investigate long-term trends and to determine epidemiologic characteristics of the CO-related deaths in the Czech Republic, recorded at the Department of Forensic Medicine in Hradec Kr?lov?.This was an autopsy-based single-centre retrospective cohort study of all fatalities caused by CO poisoning over six decades (1947-2006). All data were numerically evaluated and processed using NCSS 10 Statistical Software. Statistical significance was defined as a p-value less than 0.05.A total of 1233 CO-related deaths were identified for inclusion in the study. The manner of death was ranked in order as follows: 45% accidental poisoning, 40% suicidal poisoning, 1% homicidal poisoning, 14% remained undetermined. There were slightly more male victims (59%) than female, and the mean age overall was 48 years. The majority of CO-related fatalities were attributed to coal gas inhalation, with the remainder being from inhaled motor vehicle exhaust fumes, inhaled fire smoke, and other combustion sources such as charcoal, gas and wood-burning appliances. The mean blood carboxyhemoglobin (COHb) level was 66%. A positive blood ethanol concentration was measured in 455 (37%) cases examined. Non-intentional poisonings were highly correlated with the winter months.This study shows that the prevalence of CO-related deaths has decreased significantly in the Czech Republic following the widespread detoxification of the domestic gas in the 1990-1995. Our findings suggest that acute ethanol use, poorer socioeconomic position, and inadequate education status about the danger of CO are associated with an increased risk of fatal CO poisoning. Finally, our results demonstrate the continued value of the autopsy in monitoring global public health security issues and socioeconomic situation. Further similar large-scale studies in different populations are needed to improve the targeting of interventions to the groups with the highest level of risk, and to understand the sources of variation in CO-related mortality.
